[Substrate.io Migration] Understanding Parachain Data (Metadata) (#2)
polkadot-developers/polkadot-docs: develop/application-devs/interact/understand-parachain-data.md

```sh
curl -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
-d '{"id":1, "jsonrpc":"2.0", "method": "state_getMetadata"}' \
https://rpc.polkadot.io
```

### Using `subxt` For Metadata Retrieval

[`subxt`](https://github.com/paritytech/subxt) may also be used to fetch the metadata of any data in a human-readable JSON format: 

```sh
subxt metadata  --url wss://rpc.polkadot.io --format json > spec.json
```

Another option is to use the [`subxt` explorer web UI](https://paritytech.github.io/subxt-explorer/#/){target=\_blank}.

## Client Applications and Metadata

Client applications use the metadata to interact with the node, parse responses, and format message payloads sent to the node.
To use the metadata, client applications must use the [SCALE codec library](https://github.com/paritytech/parity-scale-codec?tab=readme-ov-file#parity-scale-codec){target=\_blank} to encode and decode RPC payloads.
Because the metadata exposes how every type is expected to be decoded, applications can send, retrieve, and process application information without manual encoding and decoding.

## Metadata Format

> Although the SCALE-encoded bytes can be decoded using the `frame-metadata` and [`parity-scale-codec`](https://github.com/paritytech/parity-scale-codec){target=\_blank} libraries, there are other tools—such as `subxt` and the Polkadot-JS API—that can convert the raw data to human-readable JSON format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although the SCALE-encoded bytes can be decoded using the `frame-metadata` and [`parity-scale-codec`](https://github.com/paritytech/parity-scale-codec){target=\_blank} libraries, there are other tools, such as `subxt` and the Polkadot-JS API, that can convert the raw data to human-readable JSON format.
```

The types and type definitions included in the metadata returned by the `state_getMetadata` RPC call depend on the metadata version of the runtime.
In general, the metadata includes the following information:

- A constant that identifies the file as containing metadata
- The version of the metadata format used in the runtime
- Type definitions for all types used in the runtime and generated by the `scale-info` crate
- Pallet information for all of the pallets included in the runtime in the order that they are defined in the `construct_runtime` macro

The following example illustrates a condensed and annotated section of metadata decoded and converted to JSON:

--8<-- 'code/application-devs/interact/metadata-format.md'

<!-- todo: signed transactions -> glossary -->

The constant `1635018093` is a magic number that identifies the file as a metadata file.

> The rest of the metadata has divided into the `types`, `pallets` and `extrinsic` sections.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The rest of the metadata is divided into the `types`, `pallets`, and `extrinsic` sections.
```

> The `types` section contains an index of the types and for each type information about its type signature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `types` section contains an index of the types and information about each type's type signature.
```

> The `pallets` section contains information about each of the pallets in the runtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `pallets` section contains information about each pallet in the runtime.
```

> The `extrinsic` section describes the type identifier and transaction format version that the runtime is using.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `extrinsic` section describes the type identifier and transaction format version that the runtime uses.
```

```sh

curl -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
-d '{"id":1, "jsonrpc":"2.0", "method": "state_getMetadata"}' \
https://rpc.polkadot.io

```

### Using Subxt For Metadata Retrieval

[`subxt`](https://github.com/paritytech/subxt){target=\_blank} may also be used to fetch the metadata of any data in a human-readable JSON format: 

```sh

subxt metadata  --url wss://rpc.polkadot.io --format json > spec.json

```

Another option is to use the [`subxt` explorer web UI](https://paritytech.github.io/subxt-explorer/#/){target=\_blank}.

## Client Applications and Metadata

The metadata exposes the expected way to decode each type, meaning applications can send, retrieve, and process application information without manual encoding and decoding. To use the metadata, client applications must use the [SCALE codec library](https://github.com/paritytech/parity-scale-codec?tab=readme-ov-file#parity-scale-codec){target=\_blank} to encode and decode RPC payloads. Client applications use the metadata to interact with the node, parse responses, and format message payloads sent to the node.

> ## Metadata Format

Reviewer 2: This may be a good section to address the previous comment regarding the Polkadot API metadata formatting.

In general, the metadata includes the following information:

- A constant identifying the file as containing metadata
- The version of the metadata format used in the runtime
- Type definitions for all types used in the runtime and generated by the `scale-info` crate
- Pallet information for all of the pallets included in the runtime in the order that they are defined in the `construct_runtime` macro

The following example illustrates a condensed and annotated section of metadata decoded and converted to JSON:

```json

--8<-- 'code/application-devs/interact/metadata-format.json'

```

The constant `1635018093` is a magic number that identifies the file as a metadata file. The rest of the metadata is divided into the `types`, `pallets`, and `extrinsic` sections:

- The `types` section contains an index of the types and information about each type's type signature
- The `pallets` section contains information about each pallet in the runtime
- The `extrinsic` section describes the type identifier and transaction format version that the runtime uses

> Different extrinsic versions can have different formats, especially when considering [signed transactions](#).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Different extrinsic versions can have different formats, especially when considering [signed transactions](). <!-- TODO: signed transactions -> glossary -->
```

Ah ok, let's do something like this

### Pallets

> The following is a condensed and annotated example of metadata for a single element in the `pallets` array (the [`sudo`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/pallet_sudo/index.html){target=\_blank}  pallet):

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following is a condensed and annotated example of metadata for a single element in the `pallets` array (the [`sudo`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/pallet_sudo/index.html){target=\_blank} pallet):
```

For example:

```json
--8<-- 'code/application-devs/interact/extrinsic-metadata.json'
```

The type system is [composite](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/polkadot_sdk_docs/reference_docs/frame_runtime_types/index.html){target=\_blank}, meaning each type identifier contains a reference to a specific type or to another type identifier that provides information about the associated primitive types.

For example, you can encode the `BitVec<Order, Store>` type, but to decode it properly you must know the types used for the `Order` and `Store` types. To find type information for `Order` and `Store`, you can use the path in the decoded JSON to locate their type identifiers.

## Other RPC APIs

A standard node comes with the following APIs to interact with a node:

- [`AuthorApiServer`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/sc_rpc/author/trait.AuthorApiServer.html){target=\_blank} - make calls into a full node, including authoring extrinsics and verifying session keys

> - [`ChainApiServer`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/sc_rpc/chain/trait.ChainApiServer.html){target=\_blank}  - retrieve block header and finality information

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- [`ChainApiServer`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/sc_rpc/chain/trait.ChainApiServer.html){target=\_blank} - retrieve block header and finality information
```

- [`OffchainApiServer`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/sc_rpc/offchain/trait.OffchainApiServer.html){target=\_blank}  - make RPC calls for offchain workers

> - [`StateApiServer`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/sc_rpc/state/trait.StateApiServer.html){target=\_blank}  - query information about on-chain state such as runtime version, storage items, and proofs

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- [`StateApiServer`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/sc_rpc/state/trait.StateApiServer.html){target=\_blank} - query information about on-chain state such as runtime version, storage items, and proofs
```

Reviewer 3: Sorry, I accidentally added in extra spaces. This is what I get for doing it on GH browser

- [`SystemApiServer`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/sc_rpc/system/trait.SystemApiServer.html){target=\_blank} - retrieve information about network state, such as connected peers and node roles

> ## Additional Resources

Reviewer 2: I wish I could put the [Developer Console](https://console.polkadot.cloud) here, but alas a tool to decode SCALE specifically has not yet been integrated. I would love to reach out again in the future when it is ready.

Author: We can definitely do this in the near future, just ping us or make an issue!

## Getting Metadata for a Runtime

The type information provided by the metadata enables applications to communicate with nodes using different versions of the runtime and across chains that expose different calls, events, types, and storage items. The metadata also allows libraries to generate a substantial portion of the code needed to communicate with a given node, enabling libraries like [`subxt`](https://github.com/paritytech/subxt){target=\_blank} to generate front-end interfaces that are specific to a target chain.

### Using Polkadot.js

Visit the [Polkadot.js Portal](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/#/rpc){target=\_blank} and select the **Developer** dropdown in the top banner. Select **RPC Calls** to make the call to request metadata. Follow these steps to make the RPC call:

1. Select **state** as the endpoint to call
2. Select **`getMetadata(at)`** as the method to call
3. Click **Submit RPC call** to submit the call and return the metadata in JSON format

![Get metadata with Polkadot.js](/images/develop/application-devs/interact/understand-parachain-data/metadata-01.webp)

> ### Using curl For Metadata Retrieval

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Using Curl For Metadata Retrieval
```

They refer to it as Curl in the README of the source repo: https://github.com/curl/curl
So lets go with that

You can fetch the metadata for the network by calling the node's RPC endpoint. This request returns the metadata in bytes rather than human-readable JSON:

```sh

curl -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
-d '{"id":1, "jsonrpc":"2.0", "method": "state_getMetadata"}' \
https://rpc.polkadot.io

```

### Using Subxt For Metadata Retrieval

> [`subxt`](https://github.com/paritytech/subxt) may also be used to fetch the metadata of any data in a human-readable JSON format: 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[`subxt`](https://github.com/paritytech/subxt){target=\_blank} may also be used to fetch the metadata of any data in a human-readable JSON format: 
```

## Metadata Format

Although the SCALE-encoded bytes can be decoded using the `frame-metadata` and [`parity-scale-codec`](https://github.com/paritytech/parity-scale-codec){target=\_blank} libraries, there are other tools, such as `subxt` and the Polkadot-JS API, that can convert the raw data to human-readable JSON format.

The types and type definitions included in the metadata returned by the `state_getMetadata` RPC call depend on the metadata version of the runtime.

In general, the metadata includes the following information:

- A constant identifying the file as containing metadata
- The version of the metadata format used in the runtime
- Type definitions for all types used in the runtime and generated by the `scale-info` crate
- Pallet information for all of the pallets included in the runtime in the order that they are defined in the `construct_runtime` macro

The following example illustrates a condensed and annotated section of metadata decoded and converted to JSON:

```json

--8<-- 'code/application-devs/interact/metadata-format.json'

```

> <!-- todo: signed transactions -> glossary -->

Reviewer 3: What's supposed to go here?

The constant `1635018093` is a magic number that identifies the file as a metadata file. The rest of the metadata is divided into the `types`, `pallets`, and `extrinsic` sections:

- The `types` section contains an index of the types and information about each type's type signature
- The `pallets` section contains information about each pallet in the runtime
- The `extrinsic` section describes the type identifier and transaction format version that the runtime uses

Different extrinsic versions can have different formats, especially when considering signed transactions.

### Pallets

> The following is a condensed and annotated example of metadata for a single element in the `pallets` array (the [`sudo`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/pallet_sudo/index.html) pallet):

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following is a condensed and annotated example of metadata for a single element in the `pallets` array (the [`sudo`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/pallet_sudo/index.html){target=\_blank}  pallet):
```

- **Storage metadata** - provides the information required to enable applications to get information for specific storage items
- **Call metadata** - includes information about the runtime calls defined by the `#[pallet]` macro including call names, arguments and documentation
- **Event metadata** - provides the metadata generated by the `#[pallet::event]` macro, including the name, arguments, and documentation for each pallet event
- **Constants metadata** - provides metadata generated by the `#[pallet::constant]` macro, including the name, type, and hex-encoded value of the constant
- **Error metadata** - provides metadata generated by the `#[pallet::error]` macro, including the name and documentation for each pallet error

!!!note
    Type identifiers change from time to time so you should avoid relying on specific type identifiers in your applications

### Extrinsic

Extrinsic metadata is generated by the runtime and provides useful information about how transactions are formatted. When decoded, the metadata contains the transaction version and the list of signed extensions.

For example:

```json
--8<-- 'code/application-devs/interact/extrinsic-metadata.json'
```

> The type system is [composite](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/polkadot_sdk_docs/reference_docs/frame_runtime_types/index.html), meaning each type identifier contains a reference to a specific type or to another type identifier that provides information about the associated primitive types.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The type system is [composite](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/polkadot_sdk_docs/reference_docs/frame_runtime_types/index.html){target=\_blank}, meaning each type identifier contains a reference to a specific type or to another type identifier that provides information about the associated primitive types.
```

For example, you can encode the `BitVec<Order, Store>` type, but to decode it properly you must know the types used for the `Order` and `Store` types. To find type information for `Order` and `Store`, you can use the path in the decoded JSON to locate their type identifiers.

## Other RPC APIs

A standard node comes with the following APIs to interact with a node:

> - [`AuthorApiServer`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/sc_rpc/author/trait.AuthorApiServer.html): make calls into a full node, including authoring extrinsics and verifying session keys
> - [`ChainApiServer`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/sc_rpc/chain/trait.ChainApiServer.html): retrieve block header and finality information
> - [`OffchainApiServer`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/sc_rpc/offchain/trait.OffchainApiServer.html): make RPC calls for offchain workers
> - [`StateApiServer`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/sc_rpc/state/trait.StateApiServer.html): query information about on-chain state such as runtime version, storage items, and proofs
> - [`SystemApiServer`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/sc_rpc/system/trait.SystemApiServer.html): retrieve information about network state, such as connected peers and node roles

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- [`AuthorApiServer`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/sc_rpc/author/trait.AuthorApiServer.html){target=\_blank} - make calls into a full node, including authoring extrinsics and verifying session keys
- [`ChainApiServer`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/sc_rpc/chain/trait.ChainApiServer.html){target=\_blank}  - retrieve block header and finality information
- [`OffchainApiServer`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/sc_rpc/offchain/trait.OffchainApiServer.html){target=\_blank}  - make RPC calls for offchain workers
- [`StateApiServer`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/sc_rpc/state/trait.StateApiServer.html){target=\_blank}  - query information about on-chain state such as runtime version, storage items, and proofs
- [`SystemApiServer`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/sc_rpc/system/trait.SystemApiServer.html){target=\_blank} - retrieve information about network state, such as connected peers and node roles
```

---
title: Understanding Metadata

> description: Learn how to interact and decipher parachain data (metadata).

Reviewer 4: The page description should be between 120 and 160 characters

---

> Each Polkadot SDK-based network exposes information about its runtime, allowing developers to know granular details regarding the types, pallets, and runtime APIs that a chain may offer.  Metadata files are SCALE-encoded, and allow the development of browser-based, mobile, or desktop applications that can keep up with potential forkless upgrades.  The concept of metadata also aids in ensuring that a single application can support many Polkadot SDK-based chains at once.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Polkadot SDK-based blockchain networks are designed to expose their runtime information, allowing developers to learn granular details regarding pallets, RPC calls, and runtime APIs. The metadata also exposes their related documentation. The chain's metadata is SCALE-encoded, allowing for the development of browser-based, mobile, or desktop applications that can seamlessly support the chain's runtime upgrades. It is also possible to develop applications that are compatible with multiple Polkadot SDK-based chains at once.
```

> ## Exposing runtime information as metadata

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Exposing Runtime Information as Metadata
```
Use Chicago title-style capitalization for titles and headings, which capitalizes the first word plus all other significant words. Same for other headings

> To interact with a node or the information stored in the blockchain, you need to know how to connect to the chain and how to access the features the runtime exposes to the outside world.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
To interact with a node or the state of the blockchain, you need to know how to connect to the chain and access the exposed runtime features.
```

> In general, this interaction involves a remote procedure call (RPC) to request information you're interested in retrieving or updating.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This interaction involves a Remote Procedure Call (RPC) through a node endpoint address, typically through a secure web socket connection.
```

> An application developer typically needs to know about the contents of the runtime's logic, including the following details:

Reviewer 5: Would be nice if we could reach out to developers like Ross and create a concise list of what he typically looked for while developing the staking dashboard.

> - The version of the runtime that the application is connecting to.
> - The APIs that the runtime supports.
> - The pallets that are implemented for that specific runtime.
> - The functions and their type signatures that are defined for that specific runtime.
> - The custom types that are defined for that specific runtime.
> - The parameters that the runtime exposes for users to set.

Reviewer 4: Do not add punctuation at the end of each list item
```suggestion
- The version of the runtime that the application is connecting to
- The APIs that the runtime supports
- The pallets that are implemented for that specific runtime
- The functions and their type signatures that are defined for that specific runtime
- The custom types that are defined for that specific runtime
- The parameters that the runtime exposes for users to set
```

> Because the Polkadot SDK is modular and provides a composable framework for building a blockchain, there's no predefined schema of properties.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
As the Polkadot SDK is modular and provides a composable framework for building blockchains, there are limitless opportunities to customize the schema of properties.
```

> Instead, every runtime is configured with its own set of properties and those properties—including functions and types—can change over time with runtime upgrades.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Each runtime can be configured with its properties, including function calls and types which can be changed over time with runtime upgrades.
```

To capture the information that's unique to a runtime, the Polkadot SDK enables you to generate the runtime **metadata** schema.
The metadata for a runtime describes the pallets in-use and types that are defined for a specific version of the runtime.

For every pallet, the metadata includes information about its storage items, functions, events, errors, and constants.
The metadata also includes type definitions for any custom types included in the runtime.

> Because it provides a complete inventory of the runtime, the metadata is the key to enabling client applications to interact with the node, parse responses, and format message payloads correctly per chain.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Because it provides a complete inventory of the runtime of a chain, the metadata is the key to enabling client applications to interact with the node, parse responses, and format message payload with that chain.
```

## Generating metadata

> To minimize the bandwidth required to transmit data over the network, the metadata schema is encoded using the [SCALE codec library](https://github.com/paritytech/parity-scale-codec?tab=readme-ov-file#parity-scale-codec).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
To efficiently use the blockchain's networking resources and minimize the transmission data over the network, the metadata schema is encoded using the [SCALE codec library](https://github.com/paritytech/parity-scale-codec?tab=readme-ov-file#parity-scale-codec).
```

> To minimize the bandwidth required to transmit data over the network, the metadata schema is encoded using the [SCALE codec library](https://github.com/paritytech/parity-scale-codec?tab=readme-ov-file#parity-scale-codec).

Reviewer 4: External links must include `{target=\_blank}` attribute, so links are always opened in a new tab.
```suggestion
To minimize the bandwidth required to transmit data over the network, the metadata schema is encoded using the [SCALE codec library](https://github.com/paritytech/parity-scale-codec?tab=readme-ov-file#parity-scale-codec){target=\_blank}.
```

Reviewer 4: Also, we usually choose to use the title of the external page as the link text. This would be something like:
... using the [Parity SCALE Codec](...)...

> This encoding is done automatically for you when you compile a node by using the [`scale-info`](https://docs.rs/scale-info/latest/scale_info/) crate.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This encoding is done automatically through the [`scale-info`](https://docs.rs/scale-info/latest/scale_info/) crate.
```

Because the metadata exposes how every type is expected to be decoded, applications can send, retrieve, and process application information without manual encoding and decoding.

## Metadata format

Although the SCALE-encoded bytes can be decoded using the `frame-metadata` and [`parity-scale-codec`](https://github.com/paritytech/parity-scale-codec) libraries, there are other tools—such as `subxt` and the Polkadot-JS API—that can convert the raw data to human-readable JSON format.

The types and type definitions included in the metadata returned by the `state_getMetadata` RPC call depend on the metadata version of the runtime.
In general, the metadata includes the following information:

- A constant that identifies the file as containing metadata.
- The version of the metadata format used in the runtime.
- Type definitions for all types used in the runtime and generated by the `scale-info` crate.
- Pallet information for all of the pallets included in the runtime in the order that they are defined in the `construct_runtime` macro.

The following example illustrates a condensed and annotated section of metadata decoded and converted to JSON:

> ```json

Reviewer 4: For better maintainability, consider using the framework's built-in snippet tool:

1. Store full code files in the `/.snippets/code/` directory, mirroring this file's path.
2. Reference snippets in your documentation using:

```
--8<-- "filename.ext"
```

For more features like only selecting a few lines from the file, check the docs:
https://facelessuser.github.io/pymdown-extensions/extensions/snippets/
